I see our entire fates in the leaves. In the promising spring, when the branch became pregnant, the blooming children were made a tacit promise. The cradle would never be shattered. Like spiders, they would be allowed a controlled descent from networks of ropes and nets. 
But if the underlying deed were easy, promises wouldn’t be necessary. Alas, this is too much for the branch to manage. Bracing for the season of its own decadence, it will unfurl its spawn onto the wild wind, which is too thin to put up the pretense of predictability, too vast to care about its innumerable collisions, too eternal to note the journey of a single leaf.

When the wind is neutralized against itself, a leaf can preserve the exact trace of its shadow throughout its descent. Only in this rarest of occurrences can the path foretold in the quivering outcast’s infancy guide its entire journey.  Is this a more merciful destiny? To be spared the constant wavering and tumult, to know in advance, like the spider, where one will land? Or is it brutal in its banality and potential lost?

In any case, the winds do not have a reputation for neutrality. Their predilection lies not in any particular direction, but in having a direction. Nature abhors vacuum because it is static, and the nature of wind is change. So palpable is the breeze that the reluctant and intermittent shedding of trees becomes unacceptable. Unto the virulent winds, progeny must be sacrificed, not one or two at a time but generations in tandem.

Do we recognize the breeze on which we ride? Recently released from the burly clasp of childhood we drift, as we must, amongst ideas and relationships and institutions which glide us in unexpected directions. Our century, defined by its fierce gusts, leaves us more bewildered than the leaves find themselves. We flicker like them, towards, around, and away from the phantoms of a stupendous fabric of causation which we see not but sense in our movements and minds – a vast web which can never be completely understood, only its existence verified and its nature examined by its effects on us. Like naughty children, the winds anticipate a clean escape after their wayward shenanigans, but they can only go unnoticed for so long. The breeze shows some part of itself by animating the leaves.

Yet even as the gale is identifiable by its consequences, it predates its own effects and seems scarcely molested by the feeble and finite world. The leaves cringe impotently as they are made to haphazardly paint the air, and then – inevitably - the ground. A few ambitious petals dare to throw themselves onto the storms of history, hoping to escape the confining atmosphere entirely.

Perhaps you too have seen such a flying arrow, which floats in from the mist and follows the winds over the horizon. You might have seen it naughtily taunt the ground only to rustle upwards and away. Didn’t you assume that at some point the projectile would have to collapse? You know as well as I that the winds have other business to move on to. The prideful leaves forget: the gusts of existence which cause everything owe them nothing. They soar and they fall because of the draft, and even when they touch and affect others of their kind, they do so on the backs of the draft.

But of course we are not reconciled to the two dimensional plane of a leaf. Instead, we are bloated with sentience, with temperaments and capacities, with memories and anticipations. When the winds move us, they move the entire universe, for we are each worlds unto ourselves. We are not the leaf itself, but rather that aware substrate within the swollen package, and for this reason, our omnipresent veils must hide from us the view from nowhere. This vector of consciousness can notice, but never mix with, the raw atmosphere - let alone the unknown elixirs that must be trapped among its brothers and sisters. The mechanics of this universe leave us epistemologically lonely, foundationally confused, and tyrannically controlled. Worse yet, we lack the cognitive tools to imagine another. This all makes even asking the question - What are we to do? - redundant and ironic. Not only do we have no other choice, but we can’t choose in the first place. Furthermore, the questioning, like all things, comes from the winds of causation - and escaping them is the entire point. What can we do?

We do the only thing we can: we tumble. If not with deeply significant agency, then with palpably deep significance. Failing that, we hope for some saving grace, that our leaf may be spared the violent turpitude, the unfortunate storm, the stem loosening rot. Should the wind not even grant us this much, we shall attempt to cling to that which can survive without agency, significance, and grace, and indeed that which thrives in their absence. We shall have our irony, our humor, and our dignity. 

