Evolution is slow and stupid. Tremendous advantages could be conferred to species which evolve mechanisms for better evolvability. Daniel Dennett calls these constructions design cranes - "a special feature of a design process that can be demonstrated to permit the local speeding up of the basic slow process of natural selection." They help species to explore the design space more quickly, efficiently, and intelligently. The three main genetic design cranes are symbiosis, sex, and genetic engineering. Each has a direct memetic analog. 

The most important symbiotic event in history occurred when an ancient prokaryote engulfed another.

>Two R & D lineages that had been chugging along for millions of years, each honing its own peculiar talents. came together and the result was-happened to be-an overnight success
>Dennett 2013

History is replete with symbiotic memes that bring forth their unique endowments into an exponentially more viral whole, partly because such a powerful confluence would be necessary for the combined memeplex to make the history books. Think for example of the memeplexes of the church and the monarch. Both coalesced their implicit knowledge about how to keep their populations servile, afraid, and credulous through political and religious incentives and institutions. They in turn are the result of countless other symbiotic memes, just as a single prokaryote is the survival machine of thousands of cooperating genes. Religious and political practices and dogma evolve over time to the benefit of the resultant faith or ideology since the continuation of the whole is necessary for the survival of any constituent meme.

Next is sex, the complex biological design crane by which organisms are afforded variation and efficient exploration of the design space. This role is served by comprehension in memetics. We don't always absorb memes just because they are catchy and viral; we try to discern their verity and utility by our critical thinking faculties, which themselves are the products of layers of baser memes (hence the term design crane). Just as one sex gets to discern which genes to carry forward through the germ line through mate choice, we get to choose the memes we accept into our ontology. 

Finally, we have genetic engineering. Memetic engineers are everywhere - the marketer trying to get their ads to go viral or the politician saying something inflammatory to get the media to give the scandalous message (and the accompanying candidate) some attention and reverb. The difference between comprehension and engineering is whether conscious choice has been applied the selection or variation of a meme, respectively. Although it is hard to imagine how one faculty could exist without the other. The capacity for creative conjecture is the same as the capacity for creative refutation.

I do not mean to imply that these are the only memetic design cranes or even the most towering and versatile ones. They simply seemed to me to be the direct counterparts to the most powerful genetic design cranes. However, these particular cranes are not inherent to the endowments of all kinds of replicators - they just happened to be what the biological world landed upon. Who knows what other construction tools exist in the landscape of ideas, and one can't help but speculate. Evolution is clever than you are, especially when evolution is evolving.

It is often noted that society and culture are changing faster and faster. Perhaps this can be explained by currently unknown memetic design cranes which are themselves evolving to become more and more powerful, bringing with them exponential progress. Imagine how much complexity and competence we could add to the memetic landscape if we could engineer design cranes that memetic evolution could not arrive at by itself. This would be an example of large cranes constructed by shorter ones (which is actually necessary in real construction). The beginning of infinity is cranes all the way up.