Most of the cultures that have ever existed have been hopelessly and oppressively static. A few anti-rational memes will sabotage an entire civilization, harnessing all its cognitive and social energy to making more replicas of itself and warding off variations. Sadly, this is the result of the fact that most of the people who have ever lived have also been captive to these mind viruses - their minds reduced to coercing themselves and each other into the grips of these cognitive replicators.

There is only one known escape from the shackles within our heads. Individuals have to dedicate themselves to the search for truth and use only verity as the measure of ideas. They must learn not to accept memes for simply surviving the tests of time or having conquered the rest of the civilization. These are arbitrary and capricious criterion for our epistemology, and subversive memes are, if nothing else, arbitrary and capricious. The role of the society then is to incentivize individuals to prove the falsity of dominant ideas. These institutions of criticism help us understand if a meme is saturating minds for its virality or verity. Conjecture and refutation is the name of the game.

But again this has to be the emergent level phenomenon of individuals who are dedicated and capable of generating creative explanations and of contradicting bad ones. Society only cumulates every person's conjectural and refutative capacity. It multiplies the two measures by which universal computers can differ from one another: speed and memory. Other than that difference, it seems to me there is in principle no distinction between the open ended progress a civilization and an individual can create. When properly established, both generate creative conjectures and refute the false ones. That societies use individuals as their unit of Popperian computation whereas individuals use homunculi in their brain is only a superficial difference - modifying the speed and memory of the computer but not its universality.

People and civilizations stand a layer of abstraction apart but are both potential beginnings of infinity in the same exact way - they have the capacity to generate new explanations and assess their verity.
