Thucydides's Trap, according to Graham Allison's book _Destined for War_, is spiraling the US and China into a war against each other. He is right so far, despite the fact that he profoundly misunderstands the nature and cause of Thucydides's Trap and therefore its implications.

The term arises from the ancient Greek historian Thucydides, who wrote in his _History of the Peloponnesian War_:

> It was the rise of Athens, and the fear that this instilled in Sparta, that made war inevitable.

Allison incorrectly extrapolates from this observation from antiquity that it is the reversal of relative power between nations that makes war inevitable. He writes, "when one great power threatens to displace another, war is almost always the result."

But this is a chimera, a manifest-level illusion. Thucydides's Trap is not caused by shifting hegemony, but rather by that which causes civilizations to gain power to the chagrin of other dominant powers - openness, freedom, and institutions of criticism. From the outside, it may look like the displacement of power between civilizations is causing conflict, but this is the side effect of the deeper phenomenon - the long term incompatibility of open and closed societies. Closed societies are destabilized by novelty, creativity, and freedom because their institutions and culture depend upon rigidity, deference, and subservience. Because open societies by their nature radiate new and potentially subversive ideas and technologies, the survival of closed societies requires the global destruction of openness and institutions of criticism which define open societies. That is why history is chalk full of mini-Enlightenments that were dismembered by threatened static civilizations - including the flourishing of art, politics, and philosophy in Athens which so frightened Sparta that they waged a desperate war against the intellectual, moral, and scientific progress Athens was making. Eventually, they succeeded in imposing an authoritarian government upon Athens and squashing the beginnings of an Enlightenment from which our (so far) successful one descends.

With this deeper explanation, we can correct Professor Allison's mistake in transposing America onto the petrified Sparta wary of any new rising powers. Rather, we are the free and open Athens whose ideas, inventions, and commitments can't help but subvert the aims and foundations of the fascist ethno-state whose fragility against independent and optimistic citizens is being bravely and continuously advertised by the protesters in Hong Kong.

This new perspective helps us understand the behavior of the Chinese Communist Party - the most blatant case study of an entrenched totalitarian paranoid institution in a closed society. Why, for instance, is the mere existence of religious and cultural minorities like the Uighur Muslims and the Tibetan Buddhists such a threat to the CCP that they would pay the price in global condemnation of brutal concentration camps and apartheid level oppression? Is the Chinese government so stupid as to risk an international backlash and internal uprisings in order to get a few million people to forget their culture and heritage? Here for the first time, it may be prudent to entertain malice before stupidity. The political and cultural memes of China, requiring and producing the static society around them, cannot tolerate heterogeneity, for variation is the source of novelty and change. Just as a single mutation during reproduction can spawn a new species, slight cultural idiosyncrasies can house the dormant seeds of rowdy ideas.

If this is the case, we are learning just how unstable the CCP is through their bizarre, neurotic, and savage behavior. There is something rather weak and pathetic about control freaks, for they reveal in their obsessions their fragility. And when we the free world search for a point of attack against this repressive and Orwellian regime, we need look no further than the gaping wound which the enemy is attempting to cover with both hands. We learn a lot about the Chinese government when they wage a war against a global sports association because a manager of a single team showed solidarity with some freedom marchers. We also find in their censorious response the betrayal of their lethal weakness: a free and open civilization which will unabashedly criticize their tyranny, hypocrisy, and absurdity.
