Imagine that you are an anti-rational meme, retarding the progress of civilization in order to prevent any unanticipated changes to the equilibrium under which you have learned to thrive. Your best bet is evade institutions of criticism where your verity might be questioned and your nature and history revealed. No, this is the home of rational memes which depend upon such structures in order to beat off anti-rational variants. Let us design the ideal institution to help you and your anti-rationality completely saturate a society. First of all, let us sentence every single person to a few decades at our penitentiary; here, we will force them to recieve our best attempt at indoctrination. And let us do this as soon as they are capable of absorbing memes so that we catch them at their weakest - when they haven't fully developed the critical faculties or the cognitive immunity which might help them ward you off.

There are two major problems. First, your institution will loose all credibility and power if it exclusively propagates transparently false memes. To preserve trust and societal entrenchment, throw in some pseudo-rational memes. These will be, as John Stuart Mill said of dead dogmas, shadows of the truth. And how could it be otherwise? You can't risk teaching your pupils the meta-memes of reason and science by which students may recognize the truth for what it is; good epistemology is to you poison. The knowledge about how to detect, eliminate, and correct errors, which is the most important knowledge because it is the beginning of any other, must be kept hidden. Instead, instill the parochial error that the measure of verity is arbitrary authority and that any deviation from this received truth is anathema. Get students to start repeating flaccid deepities (light is both a wave and a particle, the fittest individuals survive, the people should rule) and you're well on your way to giving the appearance of edification. This perversion of education is to the dissemination of explanatory knowledge what pornography is to coitus, in that every teenager will know that they're missing out on something but they can't tell yet exactly what.

Second and more distressing is the fact that all humans are endowed with creativity, and they may use this faculty to reject anti-rational memes with creative refutation, or to create competing rational memes, or to refuse to acquiesce slavishly to your demands and pursue instead an infinite variety of interesting problems at whatever pace and in whatever order that they wish. For this reason, creativity is absolutely toxic to you and to the institution you are creating (which is itself an anti-rational memeplex). So let us dictate that every person's life prospects will be dependent on how uncreatively, submissively, and unquestioningly they can replicate you. With rare exception, the being that finally "graduates" from this institution is but a phantom of the independent, skeptical, curious, and creative person that could have been.

It may seem that I drew up the details of the educational system to its disadvantage and that I could make anything seem absurd with such an unfair treatment. Good solutions are hard to vary. I claim that the educational system is uniquely competent at destroying creativity and spreading static memes because it co-evolved with those memes to be that way. If I am wrong, you should easily be able to change any of the details above and make schooling far more efficient at coercively and oppressively spreading memes. But can you?

I am not being careless by saying that anti-rational memes designed the educational system. This ghoulish machinery of indoctrination evolved under the tutelage and for the benefit of anti-rational memes; the latter carried the former forward through the centuries because the educational system generates the servile, credulous, groveling, and conformist population which is kindling for mind viruses.
