Our modern civilization is palpably dissimilar from modern day China - or for that matter, the West 300 years ago. It would be slightly patronizing of me to point out how cultures can have sharply different political philosophies, societal and familial norms, and attitudes about the place of individuals and groups in hierarchies and networks. At bottom, these are all ideas that can saturate a civilization, and ideas are memes - virtual evolutionary agents that can mutate and replicate.

Does the vast diversity of memes that have permeated different kinds of societies imply that different memomes (the total repertoire of memes that exist in a civilization) are largely distinct and mutually unrecognizable? No. Remember that our own gene pool is not substantially different from or larger than that of a mouse. Yet our equivalence to rodents is far smaller than our genetic similarities might suggest.

How can the small subset of genes that we don't share with most mammals account for the sizeable differences between us and other mammals?

Richard Dawkins explains in _The Ancestor's Tale_:

> If you think of the genome as a blueprint, you might expect a big, complicated animal like yourself to have more genes than a little mouse, with fewer cells and a less sophisticated brain. But, as I said, that isn't the way genes work ... Most of the genome that we sequence is not the book of instructions, or master computer program, for building a human or a mouse, although parts of it are. If it were, we might indeed expect our program to be larger than the mouse's. But most of the genome is more like the dictionary of words available for writing the book of instructions ... When a person is made, or when a mouse is made, both embryologies draw upon the same dictionary of genes: the normal vocabulary of mammal embryologies. The difference between a person and a mouse comes out of the different orders with which the genes, drawn from that shared mammalian vocabulary, are deployed, the different places in the body where this happens, and its timing. All this is under the control of particular genes whose business it is to turn other genes on, in complicated and exquisitely timed cascades. But such controlling genes constitute only a minority of the genes in the genome. [Dawkins, 2004, pp. 155]

Similarly, even vastly different civilizations have almost identical memomes. The difference between China and the US does not arrise from the fact that the Chinese don't have copies of our cultural, technological, and scientific memes. Indeed, it's hard to think of a significant Western meme that doesn't at least exist in China. The Chinese may watch Hollywood films, use and build iphones, and learn about some new discovery made in an American lab.

How is it possible that an Orwellian ethno-state like North Korea which sends millions of people to concentration camps can take full advantage of modern nuclear and computer technology? It should be noted that the exact same description could also apply to China, which has replicated so many Western cultural, technological, and economic memes while preserving and expanding its fascistic desires and capacities.

The experts have told us for decades that in order export the liberal memeplex (democracy, freedom, human rights), all we need to do is set up lines of communication, trade, and discourse between ourselves and authoritarian states. The hope was that if closed societies adopt enough of the Western memome, liberalism can't help but expand across the globe. This was a mistaken belief based on a lack of knowledge about the distinctions that make a difference within the memome. It's like we gave China the genes that allow for creation of human brains and faces and arms but we never bothered to replace the genes that actually decide whether the mouse or human genes will be transcribed.

Only a small subset of the memome actually determines the construction and renovation of civilizations. If we want to dismantle, displace, or build on parts of this project, we must learn what the blueprint is and then change it.
