Even George Orwell, with all his gifts, could not foresee in his novel *1984* that surveillance could be far more intrusive that a telescreen which displays to the Thought Police your movement, actions, and expressions (the wrong twitch of the lip after an Party announcement is prosecutable as facecrime). Nor could he anticipate a voluntary divulsion by almost all individuals in a society of any type of information that can feasibly be collected (which happens to be a rapidly expanding category). And how would he react as he learned ...

Consider for a moment why Google needs to store an approximated 10 to 15 million terabytes of data across more than 2.5 million servers. Surely something must justify the stupendous cost of maintaining all this data across dozens of data centers globally.

In the first place, they need space to store metadata on every person that uses their service. This includes where you've been and for how long (your Android phone, Google Search, and just about every other service they have aggregates this information). They're storing every single email you've ever typed or collected. Even if you don't use Gmail and never authorized Google to spy on your communication, Google will consolidate onto your profile all the emails you've sent and received from Gmail accounts. Don't forget the fact that the know everything you've ever tried to learn, every video that you've watched, and every link you've opened (yes, even the ones you thought were incognito, you pervert). How do they know this? Because they are your portal unto the Internet, which more and more is becoming synonymous with reality. Even the tip of the iceberg is left mostly unobserved here. One can hardly imagine (and can never know for sure) the extent of the biometric, psychological, and tangible knowledge Google has cemented of its users.

For Google, this is only a good start. They've hired some of the smartest people on Earth and given them tens of billions of dollars of resources to squeeze out every drop of implication from this gargantuan sponge of raw data. How much could you learn about a person if you had all this information? How about if this task were aided not just with thousands of these data science wizards but with the algorithms they created which are much faster, accurate, and comprehensive than any combination of humans could be at parsing all this information?

What the hell is Google collecting all this data on you for? Well, ads of course! Well that doesn't sound so bad. Google may know more about almost every single American than their own spouse but they're just trying to figure which kind of car you might buy from one of their advertisers. And in all fairness, Google has made my like easier and better in a significant amount of ways.

But here's the rub. This data includes intricate personality profiles of current and future Presidents and CEOs, not to mention invaluable analysis of how entire civilizations can be politically and socially manipulated and the infrastructure to make it happen. It's also an incredibly promising clay out of which the startlingly capable algorithms of tomorrow can sculpt even more colossally powerful tools.

We would be fools for assuming that the most profitable and potent use of all the artifacts at Google's disposal is helping Nike pitch you shoes it thinks you'll like. 