In July, the Chinese Communist Party released a historically dishonest statement to justify its concentration camps of up to two million Uighur Muslims in the Xinjiang province, claiming that “Islam is neither an indigenous nor the sole belief system of the Uighur people ... Conversion to Islam was not a voluntary choice made by the common people, but a result of religious wars and imposition by the ruling
class.”

That the Uighurs have been in Xinjiang for centuries as descendants of the Sogdian traders who Marco Polo once encountered on his travels is beside the point. As the late author and international journalist Christopher Hitchens used to remind us, _always look to the language_. What is the meaning of releasing this bizarre historical analysis in response to accusations of genocide? The holocaust deniers who keep explaining how Jews were subverting the German economy and had sabotaged the Kaiser's war effort are quite instructive here. In both cases, the implicit claim is this: _We didn't do what you said we did ... but even if we had, it would have been justified._

One can't help but ask what point such propaganda is intended to make. Because Islam was "imposed" on the Uighurs centuries ago, we're going to torture and mutilate them, sterilize their women, orphan their children, and cleanse them of their identity, history, family, and freedom? What a repugnant non-sequitur! This absolutely will not do.

It's enough justification, however for the leader of Saudi Arabia, Muhammed bin Salman, for whom Trump relaxed the sixth commandment's injunction against murder. You'll find his ambassador as a signatory of a letter praising China - the most powerful authoritarian state in history - for its "remarkable achievements in the field of human rights." The statement, which collects the full moral legitimacy of such signatories as Russia, Syria, Myanmar, Venezuela and North Korea, came days after 22 other countries rightly condemned Beijing for mass detention of the Uighurs (notably, the United States was not one of them).

Put plainly, China successfully strong-armed 37 different nations, more than half of whom are majority-Muslim, to endorse and celebrate the ethnic cleansing of two million Uighur Muslims. Not a single Islamic nation has condemned the biggest and most grotesque persecution of Muslims in history.

If these facts can't adequately illustrate China's growing hegemonic power, it's hard to imagine what could. One can't bear to consider how much leverage and influence Beijing must have around the world in order to get dozens of Muslim nations to full-throatedly approve of concentration camps where millions of other Muslims are imprisoned, tortured, and "reeducated". The most disturbing consideration is this: if despite being only the second most powerful country in the world, China can get widespread support for this ghoulishly cruel project, what unforeseen atrocities will it be able to get away with as its chases its goal of being the premiere superpower? These are questions that the free world must answer as a clear demarcation between the defense of human dignity and a veil of authoritarian control descends upon the globe. 

In the meantime, we must take advantage of the information that the signatories of this detestable letter have given us. If the term axis of evil is to mean anything, it must include nations that will praise and legitimize genocide. Yet many of these same countries are beneficiaries of America's arms, aid, and alliance. How can we justify extending our support and goodwill to nations who so vehemently oppose human rights? It is not possible for a state which supports ethnic cleansing to be aligned with American values and interests. This much should be clear to our leaders - and be made clear to the new axis of evil.