Genes are not necessarily selected because they are useful to their hosts or the host's species. They survive only upon their capacity to beat out other variants of themselves within the population. Yet however selfish genes may be, they cannot spread while being positively fatal before the reproductive age of the organism to which they belong. A gene which kills a child before he or she can procreate has no means of replicating. Therefore, no gene can be so subversive that it kills its hosts within the first 14 or so years it inhabits them (when humans become capable of reproducing).

This is not the case for memes. One can immediately spread a meme that one has just received. You find a new and interesting word in the thesaurus and you decide to include it in your essay. For a deadlier example, you just heard someone say that electrocuting one's privates is a perfectly healthy way to stimulate oneself. Now you tell your friend before you have had a chance to try it out yourself. The last thing you ever end up doing is frying your balls. This is how your friend meets his end as well, but not before telling a few more people. This is an absurd example but similarly deadly memes have been spread before. There are countless bizarre, false, and catchy medical memes which tell their hosts to poison, mutilate, or otherwise injure themselves in an attempt to cure an ailment.

The point here is that memes - especially the ones that can spread very fast - have the potential of being lethal to their hosts in a way genes never do, and it is all because memes can replicate much faster than genes can. They do not need to wait about 20 years before their hosts is capable of spread them around. A meme can be repeated in the next breath after it is heard. 

I was trying to think of examples of memes that require their hosts to survive at least a few decades. One that came to mind was parenting habits and attitudes a child might absorb from her parents and then repeat many years later when she has her own children. There are surely other such memes which lay dormant for quite a while before they find an avenue to replicate. 

I don't mean to imply that memes that take a long time to replicate are necessarily healthy or useful. They can be just as much a mind virus as any other meme. But at least these memes would have to ensure that you don't die soon after you absorb them. You may be their slave, but they still aren't going to kill you until the job is done.

