

Since I assume plenty of praise and glory will be bestowed upon Stuart Firestein in the other reports, I will be honest and direct with his shortcomings. *Ignorance* is a clumsy, imprecise, and unthoughtful summary of the scientific mindset. The good parts of the book are outdone by the best testaments to science that have been married to canvas, and the bad parts are a hundred and eighty degrees backwards. But such extraordinary criticism is only merited by extraordinary flaws – I provide the former only because Firestein has been so frivolous with the latter. A point by point rebuttal is required to disabuse us of the various confusions that Ignorance tries to impose on us.

Just the preamble will make any person with a pulse and a decent moral and common sense gasp. Here, the author destroys his thesis and the scientific project at large by saying:

>
> I’m not proselytizing for science as the only legitimate way to understand the world; it’s clearly not that. Many cultures have lived, and continue to live, quite happily without it.
>

I will never understand this impulse to condemn other cultures and civilizations to oppression, ignorance, and suffering in the name of tolerant open-mindedness. Of course science - defined as the open-ended search for good explanations - is the only legitimate way to understand the world. The central premise of any defense of science is that faith, revelation, intuition, dogma, or authority are not credible grounds for verity; only continual conjecture and refutation is. What’s wrong with sharing (as Firestein puts it – “proselytizing”) this beautiful and powerful method of thinking? And if you’re not advocating for science as the way to learn about the majesty and awe of existence, then what the hell am I reading this book for?

I might have forgiven this parochial error as a typo or an unwanted suggestion from the publisher, but the next sentence is unpardonable and immoral. I wonder if Firestein could walk into a madrasa in Afghanistan and look into the eyes of a little girl whose literacy will never extend beyond the Quran, who spends hours a day walking water back from the river because plumbing requires too much science, and whose siblings died before they turned five in completely preventable and banal ways, and tell her, “I’m so happy to see that your culture has lived, and continues to live, quite happily without science. I’ll leave you to it” What an unbelievable lack of conviction and morality! This timid and apologetic defense of the process that has lifted billions out of poverty, ignorance, oppression, and isolation is both perplexing and inexcusable.

Firestein accepts a further limitation on the reach of science. The third chapter of ignorance concedes the following many times over: 

> If the original Copernican revolution showed us that there is nothing privileged about our position in space, perhaps there is also nothing privileged about our cognitive landscape either … There may be limits. If there are sensory stimuli beyond our perception, why not ideas beyond our conception?

The implication here is that science cannot progress beyond the limits set by the human brain. But if there really is a bubble of inexplicability in which nothing makes sense (to us), the whole project of science, which claims that knowledge (and the accompanying ignorance) is limitless, is ultimately wrong and parochial. And since whatever happens in this bubble is bound to affect the things we think we understand, the items in our mental lexicon can’t be understandable or explicable either. If this is the case, the scientific project is ultimately meaningless and unprofound. 

The quantum physicist David Deutsch has named this fallacy the Principle of Mediocrity. It fails to recognize the infinite reach of explanations. Scientific knowledge is not a convolution of heuristics and observations; our true knowledge is stored in the explanations we have created about how the universe works. The reach of human capacity and understanding is infinite because we can create good explanations. If there is some reason that our brains can’t grasp a specific idea, there must be an explanation for why that is the case. Since we are already running a general computer that can understand and create explanations, the evasive nature of further accruals of knowledge must be either that our brains lack the necessary memory or speed. This can, and has been, fixed with some assistance from computers and other thinking tools. But if the claim is that even the nature of our limits is inexplicable (and thus unsurmountable), then this is nothing more than an arbitrary appeal to the supernatural. Deutsch writes, “if we wanted to incorporate into our worldview an imaginary realm explicable only to superhumans, we need never have bothered to abandon the myths of Persephone and her fellow deities.”

At least the following errors don’t contradict the very project of science but just its method. In opposition to hypothesis (explanation) centered science, Firestein quips, “Just the data, please.” Where to begin? First of all, there is no such thing as pure data. To interpret the signals from a telescope, you must have explanations about how one works, why specs on the readings signify galaxies, why blue or red shows relative movement, and everything in between. We take these as background assumptions, but they are themselves hypotheses. And even if we could have “Just the data”, it would tell us exactly nothing. Evidence is only useful in helping us test theories about the universal principle; by itself, it’s utterly useless and meaningless.

Then Firestein quotes the statistician George Box, who noted that “All models are wrong, but some are useful.” This is the fallacy of reductionism – the view that you can never claim to truly know anything about or in relationship to abstractions. What follows from this paradigm is that all questions, from which genes contribute to height to why Britain joined World War One, require a PhD in quantum mechanics to answer correctly. This may simply be an imprecise inclusion (the chapter is about Firestein boasting about the utility of models), but it is not at all consoling that this treatise on science can’t be accurate about one of the basic tenants of philosophy of science. Heuristics and statistical analysis are in fact wrong at depth, because they never explain the underlying principle and thus cannot show when and why it applies. But explanations are not wrong, even when they relate to abstractions. Thus, we can talk about genes in biology and countries in history without apology.

Ignorance teems with parochial errors and unsound thinking. It directly contradicts modern philosophy of science on the nature and reach of explanations, and it creates unnecessary apologies and limitations for the scientific method. 

In *The Beginning of Infinity*, David Deutsch gives a brilliant, accurate, and creative account of what science is and where explanations can take us. The book clarifies the various misconceptions that Firestein has displayed (two pages wasn’t enough to rebut them all), and it gives us an exhilarating and scientific treatment of everything from political structures to the multiverse. I would highly recommend it as a replacement for Ignorance. 
