### Summary

In my field of study, “Memetics”, I intend to study memes: behaviors, words, ideas, and other virtual replicators that get themselves copied from host to host (not simply viral internet images). Everything from words to entire religions can be memes since they are evolutionary agents that can mutate and cause themselves to be replicated. To reproduce, the meme must embed itself inside a host’s brain and cause the host to behave in a way that makes other brains capture the meme’s content as well. 

While many have explored the implications of a unified memetic theory, no one has successfully formed this deeper explanation which is the foundation of both the study of culture and our own minds. The intractably complex development of human intelligence could be explained through genetic and memetic coevolution, where memes find cognitive improvements much faster than genes could due to the fact that they can mutate thousands of times within a human lifetime. The genetic workload is then simply reduced to making sure that the brain is capable of accepting and making use of these memetic thinking tools. Furthermore, early proto-memes served as building blocks and searching tools for more useful and complex memeplexes (creating cranes that lifted other cranes into the sky of complexity and competence). Today, we are trying to recreate the development of human intelligence with deep learning algorithms which are akin to simulated genetic selection. Artificial intelligence research needs memetic concepts in order to recreate the powerful coevolutionary process between memes and genes. 

Notably, parasitic memes can hijack this mechanism of imitation to the detriment of their host. When entire civilizations get sabotaged by subversive and malevolent mind viruses, the result is a static society - where dominant memeplexes survive by keeping their hosts oppressed and isolated from alternative memes. Dynamic societies are dependent on meta-memes like reason and progress that can only thrive through criticism, openness, and exploration. Such considerations have enormous impacts on our civilizational values, priorities, and philosophy.

I want to search for a deeper explanation that can unite various superficially distinct fields. Such a theory should answer questions like: How do our brains instantiate complex memes and how might this allow them to host even more intricate thinking tools? What capacities do AI agents need in order to recapitulate memetic and genetic coevolution and arrive at human-level intelligence? Can we make predictions about the trajectory of nations, cultures, religions, and ideologies based on their memetic profile? How do new technologies change the mechanisms of memetic replication and selection? What kinds of benign memes does our society need to run in order to ward off toxic mind viruses? Can consciousness be best understood as a user-level illusion created to help us reason through memetic variations, and if so, what does that tell us about the nature of experience?
My curriculum will draw from Computer Science, Anthropology, Philosophy, History, and Cognitive Science.

---

### Explanation for Interest

I spent the end of winter break at a 10 day silent meditation retreat. By the end, I had failed to clear my mind; instead, I was spending 14 hours a day trying to meditate but failing to evacuate the mental infections that captured my attention every few moments. I noticed that the contents of my thoughts were no more “me” than if they had been whispering to my ear; they were instead some separate entity to whom I was a mere conduit. What exactly were these mind viruses which would not leave me alone? And how could they capture my attention so well? 

I thought I was spending 10 days observing my nature, but I was actually noticing how memes - thoughts that try to get themselves thought - could control me despite being independent of my nature. I realized that human nature is an emergent phenomenon of memetics. Our minds are to memes what oxygen is to life: produced as a side effect and later discovered to be useful and necessary, but not the animating life force. That position is always reserved for the replicator. Human nature is both the product and vector of memetic replication. Memes have our souls cornered on both ends, and are thus a more raw and useful portal into our psyches and cultures.

It was many months after my meditation retreat that I learned about memetics. I read books by scientists like Daniel Dennett and David Deutsch who were exploring the deep well of insight this new mode of explanation offers. I was struck both by how far reaching a theory of memetics could be (explaining everything from general intelligence to the mechanics of our culture to the experience I had at that meditation retreat) and how tremendously unexploited the field is. Having seen the sturdy skeleton of this beautiful new theory, I am obsessed with filling in the necessary musculature.

I want to understand memetics because I want to understand myself. To explain the physics of memes is to grasp the nature of our own minds.
