Thucydides's Trap - that is what, according to Graham Allison's book _Destined for War_, makes conflict between the US and China unnervingly likely. He is right so far, but he profoundly misunderstands what Thucydides's Trap actually is.

The term arises from the ancient Greek historian Thucydides, who wrote in his _History of the Peloponnesian War_:

> It was the rise of Athens, and the fear that this instilled in Sparta, that made war inevitable.

Allison incorrectly extrapolates from this observation from antiquity that it is the reversal of relative power between nations that makes war inevitable. He writes, "when one great power threatens to displace another, war is almost always the result."

But this is a chimera, a manifest-level illusion. Thucydides's Trap is not caused by shifting hegemony, but rather by that which causes shifting hegemony as well - the long term incompatibility of open and closed societies. Closed societies are destabilized by novelty, creativity, and freedom because their institutions and culture depend upon rigidity, deference, and subservience. Because open societies by their nature radiate new and potentially subversive ideas and technologies, the survival of closed societies requires the global destruction of openness and institutions of criticism which define open societies. That is why history is chalk full of mini-Enlightenments that were dismembered by threatened static civilizations - including the flourishing of art, politics, and philosophy in Athens which so frightened Sparta that they waged a desperate war against the intellectual, moral, and scientific progress Athens was making. Eventually, they succeeded in imposing an authoritarian government upon Athens and squashed the beginnings of an Enlightenment from which our (so far) successful one descends.

With this deeper explanation, we can correct Professor Allison's mistake in transposing America onto the petrified Sparta wary of any new rising powers. Rather, we are the free and open Athens whose ideas, inventions, and commitments can't help but subvert the aims and foundations of the fascist ethno-state whose fragility against independent and optimistic citizens is being bravely and continuously advertised by the protestors in Hong Kong.
