Just a few minutes ago, I was enthralled in a festivity here at UT called Party on the Plaza. All the students organizations get a chance to introduce themselves to prospective members at the beginning of the year in a crowded daze of flyers, elevator pitches, and small talk. One can take immense pleasure from the ricochets between the Ballroom Dancing Club and the Powerlifting Team and the Learn to Code organization. The intention behind this bazaar of novelty is to promote the old but true cliché of college expanding a young person's horizons.

But when a pre-med Pilipino girl joins the Asian Doctors Club and the Women in Science Club, has she really expanded her horizons? A full quarter of the students orgs that showed up to this event were based in their charter and name on parochial concerns about gender, race, nationality, and ethnic backgrounds. One would think that the entire point of going to a large public univeristy is to escape the confining grips of these arbirtary and meanignless categorizations and explore the wild landscape of knowledge with peers whom one considers capable of doing the same.

Unless the programming women do is categorically distinct from programming proper, encouraging women to join the Women in Computer Science club is both insulting and restrictive. It is insulting because it implies that women need some special assistance or space to succeed in CS where other groups don't and it is restrictive because it confines and triviazes the open-ended and far-reaching search for knowledge under the heels of the most banal and self-centered considerations possible.

What is the product of this ghoulish machinery of confusion, classification, and inwardness? One remember the paper product of Michelle Obama's undergraduate education which Christopher Hitchens thus summed up:

> I direct your attention to Mrs. Obama’s 1985 thesis at Princeton University. Its title (rather limited in scope, given the author and the campus) is “Princeton-Educated Blacks and the Black Community.” To describe it as hard to read would be a mistake; the thesis cannot be “read” at all, in the strict sense of the verb. This is because it wasn’t written in any known language.

The subject of the thesis is both laughable and concerning. We expect universities to teach students to look beyond the circumstances of their own existence and towards a broader understanding of our collective circumstance. If the university's purpose is only to facilitate continual self-acquaintance, a student trying to get an education need never look beyond her diary and and bedroom mirror. There is something palpably tragic about the parochial error that universal knowledge about the reality we all share needs to be transformed in order to fit meaningless and divisive classifications.

---

You might claim that such organizations make historically marginalized groups feel more comfortable at universities and thus enable them to learn more than they would in an integrated environment. But is this a contention that you are willing to accept as an argument?

What if, for example, the White Men in Psychology organization turned out to be wildly successful at making that demographic flourish and feel comfortable within a field in which they are underrepresented? The existence of such an institution would still be nauseating because it reinforces the idea that it's justified or normal for white men to feel uncomfortable outside of a segregated learning environment. And maybe if white men had been fed that narrative for decades, they would indeed start feeling uncomfortable when women or minorities joined their classes. They might claim that they need their private space where they can comfortably express their whiteness and masculinity.

This would be both racist and sexist, yet it is exactly the license universities give to create literal spaces reserved only for marginalized groups. Their existence undermines the true premise which universities ironically use to create and fund these bizarre organizations and programs in the first place: all groups of people share the capacity to understand the world and the mutual effort of all people towards the project of human flourishing and knowledge-creation requires cooperation and communication amongst superficial boundaries between the human race.
